Integrating Non-Volatile Main Memory in a Deterministic Database
Yu Chen Wang
University of Toronto
shirley.wang@mail.utoronto.ca
Angela Demke Brown
University of Toronto
demke@cs.toronto.edu
Ashvin Goel
University of Toronto
ashvin@eecg.toronto.edu
Abstract
Deterministic databases provide strong serializability while
avoiding concurrency-control related aborts by establish-
ing a serial ordering of transactions before their execution.
Recent work has shown that they can also handle skewed
and contended workloads effectively. These properties are
achieved by batching transactions in epochs and then exe-
cuting the transactions within an epoch concurrently and
deterministically. However, the predetermined serial order-
ing of transactions makes these databases more vulnerable
to long-latency transactions. As a result, they have mainly
been designed as main-memory databases, which limits the
size of the datasets that can be supported.
We show how to integrate non-volatile main memory
(NVMM) into deterministic databases to support larger data-
sets at a lower cost per gigabyte and faster failure recovery.
We describe a novel dual-version checkpointing scheme that
takes advantage of deterministic execution, epoch-based pro-
cessing and NVMM’s byte addressability to avoid persisting
all updates to NVMM. Our approach reduces NVMM ac-
cesses, provides better access locality, and reduces garbage
collection costs, thus lowering the performance impact of
using NVMM. We show that our design enables scaling the
dataset size while reducing the impacts of using NVMM,
achieving up to 79% of DRAM performance. Our design sup-
ports efficient failure recovery and outperforms alternative
failure recovery designs, especially under contended work-
loads, by up to 56%.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Record and
buffer management ; Main memory engines ; • Hard-
ware →Non-volatile memory.
Keywords: Deterministic databases, Non-volatile memory,
Recovery, Logging, Checkpointing
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
EuroSys ’23, May 8–12, 2023, Rome, Italy
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9487-1/23/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3552326.3567494
1 Introduction
Non-volatile main memory (NVMM), such as Intel’s Optane
Persistent Memory, is a persistent, byte-addressable mem-
ory technology that provides higher storage density and
lower cost per gigabyte than DRAM. Recently, there have
been several proposals for integrating NVMM into existing
storage systems and databases to improve performance or
reduce costs. For example, tiered caching designs [
26, 27]
incorporate NVMM as a caching layer between DRAM and
SSD. NVMM’s byte addressability also enables efficient re-
covery methods, such as Write-Behind Logging (WBL) [2]
and Zen [14], that minimize logging by writing updates to
NVMM directly.
In this paper, we describe the design of a novel determin-
istic database (DB) that integrates NVMM storage, enabling
efficient support for datasets much larger than DRAM ca-
pacity at a lower cost per gigabyte, and fast failure recovery.
Deterministic databases establish a serial ordering of trans-
actions before transactions are executed and ensure that the
final state of the database is consistent with serial execu-
tion in that order [
22]. These databases are attractive for
several reasons. By pre-establishing the transaction serial
order, they can ensure serializable execution, while elimi-
nating concurrency-control related deadlocks and aborts.
The lack of such aborts reduces the need for two-phase
commit to maintain consistency when transactions access
data on multiple nodes, helping scale distributed transaction
throughput [23]. Deterministic databases use input logging
and deterministic replay for failure recovery, which also sim-
plifies replication [
21] and live migration [13]. They can also
effectively handle skewed and contended accesses, which oc-
cur commonly in real workloads, such as orders for popular
items in an online store [20].
Currently, deterministic databases are designed as main-
memory databases because the predetermined serial order-
ing of transactions makes them more vulnerable to long and
varying disk latencies [22]. For example, consider transac-
tions 𝑇 1, 𝑇 2, and 𝑇 3 with the pre-determined serial order
𝑇 1 < 𝑇 2 < 𝑇 3. If 𝑇 1 and 𝑇 2 contend on key X while 𝑇 2 and
𝑇 3 contend on key Y,𝑇 3 will not be able to commit before
both 𝑇 1 and 𝑇 2 finish due to the ordering constraint. If 𝑇 1
waits for a disk access, both 𝑇 2 and 𝑇 3 are delayed, even
though 𝑇 3 does not conflict with 𝑇 1. Traditional databases
avoid this issue by re-ordering transactions during execution
(i.e., run 𝑇 3 before 𝑇 2 to avoid the wait). A main-memory
337
database reduces transaction latencies by avoiding disk de-
lays during execution, but the dataset size is limited to the
main memory size.
While it is feasible to support larger datasets by extending
DRAM with NVMM, NVMM has much higher latency and
lower throughput than DRAM, causing significant perfor-
mance overheads in a deterministic database. For example,
our evaluation with the TPC-C benchmark shows that stor-
ing the row data for the Caracal database [ 20] in NVMM
versus DRAM results in over 4x throughput degradation.
Our approach uses a hybrid DRAM-NVMM design that
takes advantage of deterministic execution to efficiently store
and access data in NVMM. Deterministic databases such as
Calvin [23], Bohm [5], PWV [6] and Caracal [20] support
concurrent execution by batching transactions in epochs.
Batching makes it possible to determine dependencies across
transactions in an epoch, which in turn enables parallelizing
the independent data accesses while ensuring the determin-
istic serial order. Our key observation is that only the final
write to a row in an epoch will be needed in future epochs,
and all previous (or intermediate) writes to the same row in
an epoch can be discarded at the end of the epoch. Thus we
only store the final write to NVMM (persistent data ), while
all intermediate writes are stored in DRAM (transient data ).
This approach works in a deterministic database because
a transaction’s outcome is uniquely determined by the data-
base’s initial state and an ordered set of known previous
transactions. Thus, unlike traditional databases that log trans-
action outputs for recovery (e.g., using redo logging), de-
terministic databases log transaction inputs and their pre-
determined serial order each epoch. Upon failure, they can
perform recovery by starting from a checkpoint of the last
epoch and re-executing the transactions in the failed epoch
using the logged inputs. Since the intermediate writes are
replayed deterministically, they do not need to be persisted.
Our separation of transient and persistent data lowers the
performance impact of using NVMM. Transactions access
transient data from DRAM with low latency. Memory man-
agement for transient data can be done efficiently, since it is
allocated for the duration of an epoch and discarded at the
end of the epoch. For persistent data, we take advantage of
NVMM’s byte addressability to checkpoint each row’s per-
sistent data during execution, instead of relying on logging
data sequentially and then checkpointing it.
Existing NVMM-based failure recovery schemes, such as
write-behind logging (WBL) [2] and Zen [14], propose log-
reducing designs that minimize logging but require persisting
all row updates to NVMM in a multi-versioned store, which
increases storage and garbage collection costs and has poor
access locality. Instead, our update-reducing design persists
each updated row only once per epoch, which is especially
beneficial for contended workloads that update certain rows
frequently. It also enables a novel epoch-based, dual-version
checkpointing scheme that reduces storage requirements,
garbage collection costs, and improves access locality.
To support our checkpointing scheme, we design efficient
NVMM allocation and garbage collection methods. For track-
ing persistent allocation information, we use a free list that
is persisted at epoch granularity. We cache persistent data in
DRAM to reduce NVMM reads and perform cache eviction
operations once per epoch, which avoids synchronization
with row accesses during transaction execution.
We implement our design in the Caracal [20] determinis-
tic database, although our approach can be applied to other
batching-based deterministic databases. We evaluate our
implementation, called NVCaracal, with the TPC-C, YCSB,
and SmallBank benchmarks. We show that NVCaracal en-
ables scaling the dataset size independent of DRAM capacity,
while minimizing the performance impact of using NVMM.
It achieves throughput up to 79% of an all-DRAM configu-
ration. Our design supports efficient failure recovery and
outperforms existing failure recovery designs, especially un-
der contention.
2 Related Work
2.1 Non-Volatile Main Memory in Databases
NVMM is byte-addressable and thus can be used to extend
DRAM. NVMM can also dramatically change the way sys-
tems store and access persistent data because applications
can directly access this data with minimal OS intervention.
NVMM can be configured in either memory or app-direct
mode. In memory mode, NVMM appears as volatile memory
to the OS and the applications – DRAM serves as a cache and
NVMM serves as main memory. This configuration is easy
to adopt because it does not require changes to application
code, but it does not provide the OS or the applications any
control over the DRAM caching policy. In app-direct mode,
applications directly access NVMM as byte-addressable non-
volatile storage.
There are several storage designs that extend DRAM using
NVMM in app-direct mode. Van Renen et al. [26] describe
a three-tier buffer manager design that uses NVMM as a
caching layer between DRAM and SSD, storing hot data in
DRAM, warm data in NVMM, and cold data in SSD. Spit-
fire [27] is another three-tier buffer manager with an adap-
tive data migration policy. It allows direct access to NVMM
pages and reduces duplicate pages cached in both DRAM
and NVMM, allowing more SSD pages to be cached. These
buffer managers implement traditional write-ahead logging
(WAL) and checkpointing in NVMM for failure recovery.
These techniques were designed for block storage devices
and do not take advantage of NVMM’s byte addressability.
They require two NVMM writes for each database update,
once for logging and then for checkpointing.
Recent recovery techniques designed specifically for
NVMM, such as Write-Behind Logging (WBL) [ 2] and
338Zen [14], minimize logging by taking advantage of NVMM’s
byte addressability to persist updates to NVMM directly,
thus avoiding the need for logging updates and checkpoint-
ing them. Our design also takes advantage of NVMM’s byte
addressability to update NVMM directly, thus eliminating a
separate checkpointing phase.
WBL [2] is a logging and recovery technique that uses
group commit and only logs a pair of timestamps per com-
mit to NVMM. These timestamps are used during recovery
to determine the changes made by un-committed transac-
tions. After a failure, WBL resumes regular execution while
garbage collecting NVMM changes made by the group of
un-committed transactions, which has poor locality. This
delayed garbage collection is not required in our design be-
cause deterministic replay during recovery writes the same
changes to the same locations. Zen [14] is an OLTP engine
that eliminates logging by using a per-row bit stored in
NVMM to determine whether a transaction has committed
and should be recovered after a crash. On recovery, Zen
needs to scan the database more than once to rebuild the
database correctly.
Both WBL and Zen use multi-versioning in NVMM. WBL
can support single-versioned systems, but stores multiple
copies in NVMM to support transaction rollbacks. Zen per-
forms garbage collection by managing free lists in DRAM,
which adds memory and compute costs, while WBL does not
specify a garbage collection design. Our novel dual-version
checkpoint design stores at most two versions per row in
NVMM, significantly reducing garbage collection costs.
In WAL, WBL or Zen, all updates must be written to per-
sistent storage at some point to support failure recovery.
Our design eliminates this requirement and reduces NVMM
accesses by taking advantage of determinism and batching.
Several recent works have proposed NVMM-based index
designs [9, 11, 15, 19, 28] for capacity expansion and fast fail-
ure recovery. Currently, our design stores indexes in DRAM
and rebuilds them during recovery. Incorporating NVMM-
based indexes would enable faster recovery.
LeanStore [12] is an efficient buffer manager designed for
extending main memory databases beyond DRAM capacity
using fast SSDs. Haubenschild et al. [7] propose logging and
checkpointing recovery techniques for such SSD-based stor-
age engines. While we currently target NVMM technology,
we plan to explore extending to fast block-based storage.
2.2 Deterministic Databases
Calvin [23] is a shared-memory deterministic database that
batches transactions to enable concurrent deterministic exe-
cution. Bohm [5] improves on Calvin’s centralized lock man-
ager by decoupling lock management from transaction execu-
tion. Piece-wise-visibility (PWV) [6] proposes making trans-
action writes visible on transaction commit, before the trans-
action finishes execution. Caracal [20] is a shared-memory
deterministic database that performs well under both skewed
Insert Append Execution
Initialization 
Phase
Execution 
Phase
Previous 
Epoch
Next 
Epoch
… …
Figure 1. The Caracal Architecture
and contended workloads. All these main-memory determin-
istic databases use batching and can incorporate our NVMM
design.
3 Background
We implement and evaluate our NVMM design in the Cara-
cal [20] deterministic database. This section provides back-
ground on Caracal and deterministic concurrency control.
3.1 The Caracal Deterministic Database
The main challenge with deterministic databases is sup-
porting concurrent execution while ensuring the predeter-
mined serial ordering of transactions. Caracal uses two tech-
niques, multiversion concurrency control (MVCC) and trans-
action batching, to support concurrent execution. With multi-
versioning, transactions can read and write different versions
of rows concurrently, allowing writers to create new row
versions safely while readers are accessing old versions. Cara-
cal supports multiple writes per item per transaction using
private buffers. Transaction batching enables determining
dependencies across transactions in a batch and paralleliz-
ing the independent data accesses while ensuring the serial
order. Next, we describe Caracal’s transaction model and
outline its deterministic concurrency control mechanism.
3.1.1 Deterministic Transaction Model. Caracal’s
transaction model is similar to other deterministic
databases’. It supports one-shot transactions in which a
client provides all transaction inputs to the database at the
start of the transaction [ 4, 5, 8, 10, 23, 25]. This approach
enables logging or replicating transaction inputs and
re-executing the transactions deterministically for failure
recovery or replication.
Caracal requires the write-set keys of transactions before
transaction execution. These keys are either inferred from
the transaction code or provided as transaction inputs, and
they are used for concurrency control as discussed below. For
transactions where the write-set cannot be inferred before
execution, Caracal supports reconnaissance transactions to
obtain the write-set by first running a read-only transaction
and then validating the reads when running the transac-
tion [
20, 23]. Caracal supports a limited form of user-level
aborts in transaction logic [4, 6]. For instance, an order place-
ment transaction should abort if there is not enough stock
left. In Caracal, these user-level aborts must be issued before
the transaction performs any writes. To do so, the transac-
tion performs reads and the relevant checks before issuing
write operations.
339T1: Update R0, Insert R1
T4: Update R0, Insert R5
T2: Read R0, RangeUpdate R1..R100
T3: Update R0, Insert R3
R0 R1 R3Rows
1
Version Array
321 3
Pending
Pending
0Data
R5
44Pending
TransactionsCores
C0
C1
C2
Pending
Pending
Pending
Pending
Figure 2. Epoch-Based Transaction Processing in Caracal
3.1.2 Deterministic Concurrency Control. Caracal
batches transactions into epochs and executes these
transactions in two phases, initialization and execution,
as shown in Figure 1. The initialization phase performs
concurrency control for all the transactions in the epoch.
The execution phase runs the transactions in the epoch.
Transactions within an epoch can be assigned any arbitrary
serial ordering, while transactions across epochs are strictly
ordered.
Figure 2 shows an example in which Caracal batches four
transactions and processes them on three cores in an epoch.
The initialization phase uses the write sets of the transactions
to create corresponding row versions with a pending value
that indicates that this version is a placeholder whose data
has not been produced yet. The write set of a transaction
contains the keys of all the rows that are to be written (in-
serted, updated or deleted) by the transaction. For example,
transactions 𝑇1, 𝑇3 and 𝑇4 update Row 𝑅0 and so the initializa-
tion phase creates three pending versions for Row 𝑅0. Each
version stores a version number that is the serial ID of the
writer transaction and a pointer to row version data. Figure1
shows that Caracal splits the initialization phase into two
steps, insert and append. The insert step creates rows and
their first pending version (insert operations) while the ap-
pend step creates additional pending row versions (update
and delete operations). This approach allows determining the
write set of certain operations that depend on row insertions,
such as range updates, during the initialization phase. As an
optimization, if the insert operation’s row data is available,
then the insert step initializes the version’s data.
During the execution phase, writers update pending row
versions with row data without any synchronization. Caracal
makes writes visible before transactions complete, similar
to PWV [6]. This is safe because transactions in Caracal do
not abort after issuing their first write, ensuring that trans-
actions read committed data. Readers execute concurrently
with writers because they can observe all the row versions
that will be created in the epoch (due to the initialization
phase) and thus can determine the correct previous version
to read based on the serial order. This guarantees that read-
ers always read the latest committed version. For example,
Transaction 𝑇2 will read the version of Row 𝑅0 that is writ-
ten by Transaction 𝑇1 in Figure 2. Unlike traditional MVCC
schemes that use a linked list for storing versions, Caracal
stores all the row versions in an epoch in a sorted version
Lock current 
epoch
pointer to
transient
row versions
pointer to
persistent
row
pointer to
cached
versionLock current 
epoch
pointer to
transient
row versions
pointer to
persistent
row
pointer to
cached
version
persistent value poolpersistent row pool
cache pooltransient pool
Index
entry for
a row
persistent row
persistent 
value
DRAM 
NVM 
... ...
pointer to
transient
row versions
pointer to
persistent
row
pointer to
cached
version
Version Array cached
persistent value
Key Serial 
ID
Ptr to
value ...Serial 
ID
Ptr to
value
persistent 
value
version 1 version 2
Figure 3. Row Structures in DRAM and NVMM
array, allowing more efficient read access to the versions dur-
ing execution. Readers synchronize with writers by waiting
when this version is pending, until it is written. No further
synchronization is needed since the execution is determinis-
tic, deadlock-free, and has no concurrency-control related
aborts.
3.1.3 Failure Recovery. Caracal implements input log-
ging but not checkpointing. We extend Caracal with our
dual-version NVMM checkpoint design to fully support fail-
ure recovery.
4 Approach
Our design supports large datasets and failure recovery by
integrating non-volatile main memory (NVMM) storage in a
deterministic database. We leverage the recovery mechanism
in a deterministic database to efficiently store and access data
in NVMM. For recovery, a deterministic database logs the
inputs and the pre-determined serial order of all the transac-
tions in an epoch before processing the transactions. Upon
failure, recovery is performed by starting from a checkpoint
of the last epoch and deterministically replaying the logged
transactions in the failed epoch.1
Our key idea is that we can minimize writes to NVMM
by only storing the data needed for a checkpoint in NVMM.
When a row is updated by any transaction in an epoch, it
is immediately visible to other transactions [ 6]. However,
we only need to store the final write to the row in an epoch
to NVMM. All the previous (or intermediate) writes can
be stored in DRAM and discarded at the end of the epoch.
Unlike a non-deterministic database, which must store all
committed writes to NVMM, either by logging and then
writing them to the database [
26, 27] or in the database
directly [2, 14], we can avoid storing the intermediate writes
1While checkpoints do not need to be taken each epoch, we assume that
the epoch is sized based on the checkpoint interval.
340to NVMM because they can be recreated when transactions
are replayed deterministically during recovery.
We can efficiently distinguish between the intermediate
writes and the final write in a deterministic database since we
know the write sets of transactions and their serial order be-
fore transaction execution (see Section 3.1.1). Figure 3 shows
the row structure in our design. We store the intermediate
writes as versions in a version array in the transient pool in
DRAM (transient data), and the final write in the persistent
row and persistent value pools in NVMM (persistent data).
Our separation of transient and persistent data lowers the
performance impact of using NVMM in a deterministic data-
base since transactions access transient data from DRAM
with low latency.
We use several different pools in DRAM based on usage.
The transient pool is created each epoch and discarded at
the end of the epoch because the intermediate writes are not
needed for checkpointing or by transactions in later epochs.
We optimize reads by using a cache pool that caches the per-
sistent row value (cached version). This pool is sized based on
DRAM capacity. Currently, we store the row index in DRAM
for performance. Our design reduces DRAM requirements
significantly because only the row index and the transient
pool must fit in DRAM. The row index is much smaller than
the row data stored in NVMM, and the transient pool size
only depends on the epoch size.
4.1 Epoch-Based Transaction Processing
Algorithm 1 shows our epoch-based deterministic transac-
tion processing algorithm. The insert and append steps per-
form concurrency control and the execute phase runs the
transactions in the epoch, as explained in Section 3.1.2. Dur-
ing the insert step, we create new persistent rows in NVMM
directly. We do not create any transient data or a cached
version for these rows until they are accessed later, thus
ensuring that only hot rows are cached in DRAM.
During the append step, the first thread that tries to ap-
pend to a row creates the version array for the row in the
transient pool. Then it creates an initial version in the ver-
sion array by copying existing data from the persistent row.
If the row is cached, it copies the initial version from the
cached version instead, and then deletes the cached version
since it will be updated during the execution phase. After
that, the first thread and later threads append new pending
versions to the version array in the transient pool.
During the execution phase, transactions write to rows by
creating version values in the version array in the transient
pool. The final write creates a cached version so that it re-
mains cached in the next epoch, links the final version in the
version array to the cached value, and then writes to the per-
sistent row. The cached value is created before the persistent
value so that the write is visible to other transactions earlier
and they can read the value from DRAM. A transaction reads
the latest version from the version array that has a serial
Algorithm 1: Epoch-Based Deterministic Transac-
tion Processing
init_database()
for each epoch do
log_transaction_inputs()
/* Initialization phase */
insert_step()
GC_major()
evict_cache()
append_step()
/* Execution phase */
execute_phase()
fence()
persist_epoch_number()
fence()
/* Epoch checkpointed */
transient_pool_free()
end
ID smaller than its own serial ID. When there are no writes
to the row during the current epoch, then the version array
will not exist. In this case, the transaction reads from the
cached version or the persistent row. In this design, a row
is written at most once, and read at most once (zero times if
cached) from NVMM per epoch. The other operations shown
in Algorithm 1 are explained in the following subsections.
4.2 Evicting Cached Versions
The cached version of a persistent row helps reduce NVMM
reads. We evict cached versions using an epoch-based LRU
policy. Cached versions that have not been updated or ac-
cessed in the last user-configurable K epochs are evicted,
ensuring that hot rows accessed in recent epochs are kept
cached. As shown in Algorithm 1, we evict cached versions
during the initialization phase when transactions are not ex-
ecuting, thus requiring no synchronization between eviction
and transaction execution.
4.3 Failure Recovery
Our design supports efficient failure recovery by logging the
transaction inputs to NVMM at the beginning of each epoch.
In many transaction processing workloads, these inputs are
much smaller than the transaction writes that are logged by
traditional write-ahead logging, which reduces logging over-
heads. Furthermore, since all transaction inputs are available
at the beginning of the epoch, logging can be performed
efficiently at close to maximum NVMM throughput.
We ensure that all transaction inputs in the epoch are
logged and persisted before the execution phase shown in
Algorithm 1. As a result, all writes during transaction ex-
ecution can be made visible immediately, even before the
341transaction ends, since on a failure, we can replay these
writes deterministically.
To support failure recovery, we need to checkpoint each
epoch so that we can replay the failed epoch starting from the
previous epoch’s checkpoint. Thus, as shown in Figure3, we
store two versions in the persistent row in NVMM, the most
recent checkpointed version from a previous epoch, and a
version that is either written in the currently executing epoch
or is a stale checkpointed version. We require at most two
versions in the persistent row because each row is updated
at most once by the final write in an epoch. The most recent
checkpointed versions of all the rows provide a checkpoint
of the last epoch and are used for recovery after a crash.
At the end of each epoch, we issue a memory fence to
ensure that all changes made to NVMM in this epoch are
persisted. Then, we persist the current epoch number to
NVMM and issue another fence. After this step is complete,
the epoch has been checkpointed.
During recovery, we first rebuild the row indexes by scan-
ning the keys of all the persistent rows. As discussed later
in Sections5.4 and 5.5, our persistent row and persistent
value allocator pools ensure that any row allocations or dele-
tions that were performed in the crashed epoch are reverted.
Then, we replay the transactions using their logged inputs
and serial order using our regular epoch-based determin-
istic concurrency control, which guarantees that the same
transactions will update the same rows during recovery.
4.4 Persistent Row Garbage Collection (GC)
We need to garbage collect row versions since we store at
most two row versions in NVMM. Our basic garbage collec-
tor, which we call the major collector, tracks the updated
persistent rows each epoch. Then in the next epoch, during
the initialization phase (see Listing 1), the major collector
deletes the stale version of each updated row, making the
version available for this epoch’s execution phase. This col-
lector imposes two overheads. First, each updated persistent
row is written twice per epoch, once when it is updated,
and then when its stale version is collected, which increases
the number of NVMM writes. Second, tracking the updated
persistent rows has memory and computation costs.
We reduce the cost of GC by using a minor collector that
does not require tracking the updated persistent rows. In-
stead, it triggers when a thread writes a final version to the
persistent row and finds two existing versions. The thread
deletes the stale version immediately, thus making a version
available for the final version. By performing GC as part of
the update, the minor collector avoids cold NVMM accesses
to the persistent rows during major GC. Section5.3 describes
when we use the two garbage collectors.
4.5 Recovery Correctness
We store the two versions in the persistent row, shown in
Figure 3, in the same cache line. Each version has a serial
ID (SID) of the transaction that wrote the version and a
pointer to the version value. Our design ensures that the first
version in the persistent row always has a smaller SID than
the second version, which avoids comparing version SIDs to
determine the latest version.
Both the major and minor collectors ensure that we copy
the second (most recent checkpointed) version to the first
(stale) version before resetting or overwriting the newly
available version. Thus, on failure, the most recent check-
pointed version will not be lost (either one or two versions
will exist) and can be used during recovery.
When updating a version in the persistent row, both the
SID and the pointer to the version need to be modified, but
a crash may occur between the modifications to the SID
and the pointer. To handle such intervening crashes, we
always modify the SID before the pointer. During recovery
we can detect whether the pointer was updated or not before
the crash by comparing the SID of both the versions. There
are three situations when an intervening crash could occur
during a persistent version update:
1. GC modifies the first SID version by copying the second
version to the first. In this case, we would observe both ver-
sions have the same SID (and it is not the crashed epoch’s
SID). If they have different pointers, then we simply copy
the second version’s pointer to the first version.
2. GC modifies the second SID version by resetting it to null.
In this case, we would observe a null SID in the second
version. If the pointer is not null then we simply reset the
pointer to null.
3. A transaction writes the final row version in the second
SID version. In this case, the second version’s SID would
match the crashed epoch’s SID. During replay, when a
transaction writes a final version to the persistent row,
it checks whether the persistent row may have already
been written during the crashed epoch by checking the
serial ID of the second version. If the serial ID was updated
during the crashed epoch, the transaction overwrites the
version, thus updating the pointer. Otherwise, it performs
the write normally, e.g., it may perform minor GC.
Note that modifications to new rows inserted in the
crashed epoch will not affect recovery since they are dis-
carded by our persistent allocators after a crash, explained
in Section 5.
4.6 Supporting Transaction Aborts
Deterministic databases eliminate concurrency-control-
related aborts. However, transactions can still abort based on
application logic, such as aborting a transaction that results
in a negative bank account balance. When a transaction
aborts, it writes IGNORE markers in all of the pending row
versions created by the transaction. Other transactions that
are reading the version array skip the IGNORE markers and
read from a previous non-ignore version.
342If an aborted write was originally the final write to a row
in the epoch, then it searches for the latest non-ignore ver-
sion in the version array written in this epoch and writes
that version to the persistent row as the final write of this
epoch. If the latest non-ignored version is the initial version
in the version array then the persistent row will not be up-
dated because the initial version was written during previous
epochs and already exists in the persistent row. The cached
version is also updated to the latest non-ignore version.
5 Implementation
5.1 Transient Pool Design
The transient pool stores the row version array and the tran-
sient version values. We allocate memory for the transient
pool using per-core bump allocators. At the end of the epoch,
we discard the entire transient pool by simply resetting the
bump allocator offset. The row index contains a pointer to
the version array (see Figure 3), but version arrays are deal-
located at the end of the epoch. Instead of resetting this
pointer for every updated row, we detect stale pointers by
maintaining a version array epoch number in the row index.
5.2 Cache Eviction
We associate an epoch number with each cached version.
When a cached version is created, its epoch number is set to
the current epoch, and it is added to the cache eviction list
of the current epoch. Whenever the cached version is read
or updated by a transaction, we update its epoch number to
the current epoch.
In the initialization phase of an epoch, we perform cache
eviction on the current - K - 1 epoch’s eviction list. If we
see a cached version with a more recent epoch number than
current - K - 1, we add it to the eviction list of its epoch
number and do not evict it. This design evicts all cached
versions that were not accessed in the last K epochs.
By using epoch-based eviction outside the execution
phase, we can avoid synchronization with row accesses
during transaction execution. While our current design does
not evict cached versions during execution phases, we can
incorporate existing methods [14] to handle heavy memory
pressure during execution.
5.3 Persistent Row Design and Garbage Collection
Each persistent row has a fixed size of 256 bytes (by default),
which is also the internal access granularity of Intel Optane
Persistent Memory. We optimize our storage design by using
an inline heap within the persistent row (168 bytes). If a
persistent value (either or both of the versions shown in
Figure3) fits within the inline heap, we store it there to
improve locality and avoid allocating additional NVMM.
Recall from Section 4.4 that both the minor and major
garbage collectors delete the first (stale) version. The minor
collector is efficient and operates when the final version is
being written during execution, while the major collector
operates during the initialization phase. We use the minor
collector for persistent rows whose first version is in the
inline heap. Otherwise, we use the major collector. We will
explain this choice in Section 5.5.
5.4 Persistent Row Pool
The persistent row pool handles allocation and freeing of
persistent rows. Each persistent row is fixed size, making it
is easy to locate and scan allocated rows during recovery.
To support failure recovery, the persistent row pool must
be able to revert the allocation status of the persistent rows
to the last checkpointed epoch. Thus any deleted rows in the
current epoch must remain allocated and any allocated rows
must remain free. Instead of using existing NVMM allocators,
we design our own allocator to support epoch-granularity
undo efficiently.
For the persistent row pool, we could store a free list in
DRAM and track the allocation status of a persistent row
by storing an allocation and a deletion epoch number in
each persistent row. This would allow rebuilding the state of
the free list at the last checkpointed epoch during recovery.
However, each allocation and deallocation would require
costly modification of the corresponding epoch number field
in NVMM.
Instead, we optimize persistent row allocation and free-
ing by using a per-core persistent bump allocator and free
list to track the allocation status of the persistent rows, as
shown in Figure 4. The bump allocator uses an offset stored
in DRAM (shown as offset) to track the size of the allo-
cated region (similar to the sbrk system call), and it is used
when the free list is empty. Allocations are performed by
simply updating this offset in DRAM. The bump allocator
also maintains two offsets in NVMM, a checkpointed version
and a previously checkpointed version (shown as offset
1 and offset 2 respectively, in Figure 4). When the exe-
cution phase completes, we persist the DRAM offset to the
previously checkpointed version and issue a fence. After the
epoch is checkpointed, the previously checkpointed version
becomes the checkpointed version. On a crash, we use the
checkpointed version to load the DRAM offset, thus reverting
the allocated region to its checkpointed state. For example,
offset version 1 is persisted during odd epochs and version 2
is persisted during even epochs. During recovery, if the last
checkpointed epoch is epoch 5, we would recover the offset
from version 1, as it is the most recent checkpointed offset.
We use a per-core ring buffer to store the free list for the
core’s bump allocator. This list uses a head and tail offset
stored in DRAM (shown as head and tail in Figure 4) and
stores pointers to deleted persistent rows. Allocations are
performed from the head of the list while deletions are added
to the tail of the list. Similar to the bump allocator, the head
and tail offsets have two versions in NVMM for recovery. We
maintain two invariants in order to be able to revert the free
343Figure 4. Persistent Row Pool Allocator and Free List
list to the state of the latest checkpointed epoch after a crash.
First, the free list of the last checkpointed epoch must not be
modified until the current epoch is checkpointed. This en-
sures that we can revert the free list to the last checkpointed
state. Second, the persistent rows that are deleted in the cur-
rent epoch must not be re-allocated in the same epoch. This
ensures that the persistent rows will not be modified and
thus their deletions can be reverted if the epoch crashes.
We allocate a persistent row from the free list by incre-
menting the DRAM head offset, which does not modify the
free list in NVMM, thus ensuring the first invariant. We
delete a persistent row by adding it to the tail of the free
list and increasing the DRAM tail offset. During an epoch,
allocations are not allowed beyond the last checkpointed tail
offset (head cannot crosstail 1in Figure4), since the persis-
tent rows beyond that tail offset were deleted in the current
epoch. These rows must not be reused until the epoch is
checkpointed, which ensures the second invariant. We use
the bump allocator when an allocation cannot be fulfilled
from the free list. Our current implementation assumes that
the bump allocator is configured to be large enough for the
database and will not run out of space.
Figure 4(a) shows the state of the persistent row pool at
the beginning of an epoch. Offset 1, head 1, and tail 1 show
the checkpointed state from the previous epoch. Figure 4(b)
shows that offset 2, head 2 and tail 2 have been updated from
their corresponding DRAM values at the end of the current
epoch. Items in the free list between head 1 and head 2 were
re-allocated in the current epoch and are no longer part of
the free list. Similarly, items between tail 1 and tail 2 were
deleted and added to the free list.
Our design is efficient because allocations do not require
any persistent writes. A deletion appends a pointer to the
free list in NVMM, but these appends are sequential and can
be flushed in batches, such as at the 256 byte NVMM access
granularity. It is also possible to store the deleted pointers
in a temporary buffer in DRAM and then sequentially copy
the buffer to the free list at the end of the epoch before the
epoch is checkpointed.
Our implementation maps the NVMM memory regions
used by the ring buffers and the bump allocators to fixed
addresses in each run. This allows us to use the persistent
row and persistent value pointers without modification after
a crash. If mapping to a fixed address is not possible then we
can store offsets instead of pointers and calculate the pointer
address using the starting address of the memory region.
5.5 Persistent Value Pool
The persistent value pool handles allocations and frees for
persistent values in NVMM. It has the same general design
as the persistent row pool, consisting of a per-core persistent
bump allocator and free list. We currently allocate persistent
values using a fixed size of 1024 bytes. This design can be ex-
tended to support multiple sizes by using multiple persistent
value pools, such as one pool for each power of two size.
Unlike the persistent row pool, the persistent value pool
needs to cooperate with GC. While a persistent row is only
deleted when a transaction deletes a row, a persistent value
can be deleted when a transaction deletes a row or due to
GC. Deletions of rows or values due to transaction logic
should be reverted on a crash since the transactions will be
replayed deterministically during recovery. However, when
GC deletes a persistent value, it overwrites the pointer in
the persistent row. If this deletion is reverted after a crash,
an NVMM leak would occur since the old pointer value
cannot be reverted. Thus, the persistent value pool needs to
handle both revertible deletions from transactions and non-
revertible deletions from GC. In the first case the persistent
free list must be reverted after a crash, but in the second case
the free list must not be reverted after a crash.
We simplify the persistent value pool design by ensuring
that the two types of deletions do not occur simultaneously.
Transaction execution performs revertible deletions, and we
do not perform minor GC for non-inline versions. Instead,
these versions are deleted by the major collector during the
initialization phase, when transactions are not executing (see
Section4.4). With this design, we ensure correct operation by
persisting the free list during major GC before the execution
phase. A crash during execution reverts the free list to its
state after major GC. A crash during major GC does not need
to revert any deletions made by transactions in the previous
checkpointed epoch.
We add a third non-revertible offset in NVMM called cur-
rent tail offset to track the free list during major GC. We
elide this implementation detail due to space constraints.
344If a crash happens during major GC, we need to rebuild the
GC list since we do not persist the list during the execution
phase. During recovery, when scanning the persistent rows
to rebuild the index, we add rows to the GC list when they
have two versions and the first one is non-inline (Section5.3).
We need to ensure that major GC operates idempotently
so that we can complete a failed collection correctly. While
major GC prevents memory leaks, a crash in between can
leave dangling pointers in the persistent rows and cause
duplicate deletes upon recovery. On recovery, we build a
hash table of the pointers that were deleted in the crashed
epoch to detect and avoid adding duplicates to the free list.
6 Evaluation
We implement our NVMM design in Caracal (calledNVCara-
cal) and compare its performance with Zen, a state of the
art OLTP engine designed for NVMM (see Section 2.1). We
also measure the throughput of NVCaracal and alternative
NVMM designs in Caracal to compare NVCaracal’s epoch-
based recovery scheme with existing recovery schemes in a
deterministic database. We break down NVCaracal’s DRAM
and NVMM usage to evaluate how well our design can sup-
port larger datasets. We also compare the throughput of
NVCaracal against Caracal in DRAM to evaluate the impact
of NVMM on performance. Finally, we evaluate the impact
of deterministic replay on recovery time in NVCaracal.
We show that NVCaracal can effectively expand the
dataset size to NVMM capacity while minimizing NVMM’s
impact on performance, and it performs better under
contention than alternative designs that provide failure
recovery.
6.1 Machine setup
We run our experiments on a machine equipped with an
Intel Xeon Silver 4215 CPU with 8 cores and 1 NUMA zone,
11 MB of last level cache, 96 GB of DRAM, and 256 GB of
Intel Optane Persistent Memory. The NVMM is configured
in App Direct mode with an Ext4 filesystem in fsdax mode
mounted on it. The machine runs Ubuntu20.04.1 LTS with
5.4.0-54-generic Linux kernel. Measured on our machine,
DRAM has 11.9X and 3.2X higher throughput than NVMM
for random writes and reads, respectively.
6.2 Benchmarks
We evaluate NVCaracal using both uncontended and con-
tended workloads in three benchmarks: YCSB, SmallBank,
and TPC-C. For all benchmarks, we run Caracal’s default of
49 epochs with 100,000 transactions per epoch. Using larger
epoch sizes can improve throughput at the cost of higher la-
tencies [20]. Our design will also perform better with larger
epochs since rows are likely to be updated more times per
epoch and so a higher percentage of updates will be written
to DRAM compared to NVMM. We set the default cache
dataset size 16M rows, ≈40 GB
64M rows, ≈150 GB (YCSB-large)
value size 1000
64 (YCSB-smallrow)
hotspot rows 256 rows
low contention 0/10 accesses to hotspot rows
medium contention 4/10 accesses to hotspot rows
high contention 7/10 accesses to hotspot rows
Table 1. YCSB Configurations. Dataset sizes in GB refer to
space used by NVCaracal.
dataset size 18 million, ≈10 GB
(customers) 180 million, ≈100 GB (SmallBank-large)
value size 8
low contention 1 million hotspot customers
high contention 10,000 hotspot customers
Table 2. SmallBank Configurations. Dataset sizes in GB rfe-
fer to space used by NVCaracal.
eviction parameter K to 20, so that rows not accessed in the
most recent 20 epochs are evicted from the DRAM cache.
6.2.1 YCSB. The YCSB microbenchmark was designed to
evaluate key-value stores [3]. Its original implementation
does not have multi-key transactions, so we use Caracal’s
YCSB implementation, which groups 10 read-modify-write
operations to unique keys into one transaction. Our default
YCSB configuration uses one table with 16M rows, where
each row is 1,000 bytes and each write operation updates the
first 100 bytes of the row to represent updates to a subset of
columns. To evaluate larger datasets, we increase the num-
ber of rows to 64M (YCSB-large); to evaluate value inlining,
we decrease the row size to 64 bytes and update the entire
row (YCSB-smallrow). To change the contention level, we
designate 256 rows as "hot" and select varying numbers of
keys in a transaction from the hot rows; the remaining keys
are chosen randomly from a uniform distribution. Table 1
summarizes our YCSB configurations.
6.2.2 SmallBank.
SmallBank is an OLTP benchmark that
simulates transactions to bank accounts [1]. It includes five
types of transactions that are chosen randomly and uni-
formly. Two of the transaction types may abort at a rate of
10%. The original SmallBank benchmark consists of 18,000
customers, a subset of which are designated as hotspot cus-
tomers whose accounts are targeted by 90% of the transac-
tions. In our experiments, we scale the benchmark size by
1000 so it is more realistic for a database; to evaluate larger-
than-DRAM datasets we increase the size by an additional
10x. Table 2 summarizes our SmallBank configurations.
345low contention 256 warehouses
high contention 1 warehouse
Table 3. TPC-C Configurations
YCSB SmallBank
NVCaracal 2304 bytes 128 bytes
Persistent Row Size
Zen 1024 bytes 32 bytes
Persistent Row Size
Max Number of 16M 6M
Cache Entries 20M (YCSB-large)
NVCaracal 17 GB 384 MB
Cache Size 20 GB (YCSB-large)
Zen 17 GB 768 MB
Cache Size 20 GB (YCSB-large)
Table 4. NVCaracal and Zen Configurations
6.2.3 TPC-C. TPC-C is an OLTP benchmark with five
transactions that simulates a wholesale supplier with mul-
tiple warehouses [ 24]. We use both 256-warehouse TPC-
C and single-warehouse TPC-C to evaluate low and high
contention workloads, respectively, as summarized in Ta-
ble3. We use Caracal’s implementation of TPC-C, which
includes two modifications for deterministic execution [20].
For Payment transactions, Caracal removes the customer
name lookup and instead provides the customer ID as a trans-
action input. For NewOrder transactions, Caracal uses an
atomic counter in the insert phase to generate the order id
(instead of incrementing a field in the District table) since it
requires the write sets of transactions before execution.
Caracal’s implementation of TPC-C is not completely de-
terministic due to these counters, so we modify failure recov-
ery for TPC-C slightly. First, we persist the atomic counter
values to NVMM at the end of each epoch so we can recover
to the state of the latest committed epoch. Second, since
different order IDs might be assigned to transactions during
replay, we do not make results visible to the user until the
epoch is checkpointed. Finally, we revert all persistent val-
ues written in the crashed epoch before replaying the epoch
during recovery. Changes are reverted while scanning each
persistent row to rebuild the index. We use the serial ID of
the persistent row’s second version to check if it was written
during the crashed epoch, and if so, we reset the second
version to null. We evaluate the impact on recovery time due
to reverting changes in Section 6.8.
6.3 Transaction Throughput Comparison with Zen
We compare the throughput of NVCaracal and Zen using the
YCSB and SmallBank benchmarks with different contention
levels, and with datasets that fit in DRAM and exceed DRAM
capacity (see Tables 1 and 2). We omit TPC-C since it is not
(a) 16M rows, 1K row size (b) 64M rows, 1K row size
Figure 5. YCSB Throughput with (a) Default and (b) Larger
Than DRAM Datasets.
(a) 18 million customers (b) 180 (NVCaracal) or
167 (Zen) million customers
Figure 6. SmallBank Throughput with (a) Default and (b)
Larger Than DRAM (SmallBank-large) Datasets.
supported by Zen’s open-sourced code. For Zen’s SmallBank-
large, we decrease the dataset size slightly to 167 million
customers, since its DRAM allocation exceeds the DRAM
capacity of our machine at 180 million customers. Table 4
shows various configurations used for this experiment. For
a better comparison, we use the optimal persistent row sizes
that result in the highest throughputs for both NVCaracal
and Zen. For NVCaracal, these sizes allow inlining all per-
sistent values to the persistent rows. We also configure the
same limit of DRAM cache entries for NVCaracal and Zen.
We have evaluated Zen with double the number of cache en-
tries and did not observe a significant impact on performance
(at most 4%).
Figure 5 shows the YCSB throughput of NVCaracal and
Zen. Under low contention, NVCaracal is only able to write
3% of the updates as transient values to DRAM since most
rows are only updated once within an epoch. Thus for each
update, NVCaracal must write to NVMM twice (once for
input logging, and once for writing the update during exe-
cution), causing NVCaracal to perform 30-36% worse than
Zen under low contention. However, as the contention level
increases, NVCaracal outperforms Zen despite having ad-
ditional logging requirements due to the reduced number
of NVMM writes during execution that result from writ-
ing transient values. At high contention, NVCaracal is able
to write 70% of the updates as transient values to DRAM,
whereas Zen must write all updates to NVMM regardless of
346Figure 7. Throughput Comparison Against Alternative NVMM Designs
Figure 8. DRAM and NVMM Consumption in NVCaracal
contention level. Therefore, NVCaracal outperforms Zen by
45-56% under high contention.
Figure 6 shows the SmallBank throughput of NVCaracal
and Zen. NVCaracal outperforms Zen by 14-21% under low
contention and 31-37% under high contention. The Small-
Bank transaction input sizes are much smaller than in YCSB,
which reduces input logging for NVCaracal. Both Zen and
NVCaracal show improved performance under high con-
tention due to higher hit rates in their DRAM caches, which
reduce NVMM reads, especially for the read-only table in
SmallBank. NVCaracal also reduces NVMM writes using
transient updates under high contention, on top of reducing
NVMM reads with the DRAM cache. Therefore, NVCaracal
outperforms Zen by a wider margin under high contention.
For both YCSB and SmallBank, both NVCaracal and Zen
experience small reductions in throughput when comparing
the larger data set to the default data set due to a lower
DRAM cache hit rate. For both benchmarks, NVCaracal’s
throughput drops by 2% on average but Zen’s throughput
drops by 7% on average since Zen is more reliant on the
DRAM cache for reducing NVMM accesses.
6.4 NVCaracal Design Analysis
We evaluate the performance of NVCaracal, which uses input
logging for failure recovery and avoids writing transient
versions to NVMM, against two alternative NVMM Caracal
designs using low and high contention TPC-C, YCSB, YCSB-
smallrow, and SmallBank benchmarks (Figure 7). Caracal
in NVMM (all-NVMM) is a simple baseline design where
all values and version arrays are stored in NVMM. Caracal
in hybrid DRAM-NVMM (hybrid) improves on the baseline
design by storing version arrays in DRAM and writing all
updates to NVMM, but with caching in DRAM similar to
Zen. Both all-NVMM and hybrid omit logging since it is
theoretically possible to support failure recovery without
logging when all updates are written to NVMM. We use the
default persistent row size of 256 bytes for all benchmarks
to show the impact of inlining values in persistent rows
vs. allocating them from the persistent value pool. We use
default datasets that fit in DRAM to compare with Caracal
in DRAM in Section 6.7.
In all benchmarks except for YCSB, almost all persistent
values can be inlined within the persistent rows. In YCSB, all
values are non-inline. Inlining reduces NVMM allocations
for persistent values and improves NVMM access locality
because the persistent row size is within the internal access
granularity of Intel Optane Persistent Memory (256 bytes).
Figure 7 shows that the simple baseline design always
has the worst performance since it stores all data in NVMM,
which has much lower throughput than DRAM. Both hybrid
and NVCaracal outperform all-NVMM since they leverage
DRAM to reduce the impact of NVMM on performance. In
NVCaracal, the reduction in NVMM accesses is proportional
to the number of transient version values stored in DRAM,
which increases with higher contention in the workload. We
see that NVCaracal performs better under higher contention
for all benchmarks. For the low / high contention YCSB and
SmallBank benchmarks, roughly 3% / 70% of the versions are
transient, while for TPC-C roughly 8% / 30% of the versions
are transient.
When version values are large like in YCSB, all-NVMM
performs significantly worse than NVCaracal under con-
tention (2.9x slower) due to writing large transient values
to NVMM. When version values are small (e.g., SmallBank),
all-NVMM improves under higher contention and is only
1.38x slower than NVCaracal. NVCaracal and hybrid have
similar performance under low contention, but NVCaracal
outperforms hybrid for all high-contention workloads. This
demonstrates the trade-off of reducing logging versus re-
ducing NVMM writes during execution in a deterministic
database. NVCaracal performs more writes to NVMM than
hybrid for YCSB-smallrow and SmallBank, since (a) the trans-
action inputs are not smaller than their outputs, and (b) the
347Figure 9. Impact of Optimizations on Throughput
Figure 10. Failure Recovery Impact on Throughput
final writes in each epoch are written to NVMM during exe-
cution as well as being logged as input. However, NVCaracal
still outperforms hybrid since it reduces long latency NVMM
writes on transactions’ critical paths during execution. This
can greatly affect the performance of a deterministic data-
base due to its limited re-ordering capability.
6.5 Memory Consumption
Figure 8 breaks down the DRAM and NVMM usage for the
data structures in NVCaracal. In all benchmarks, most of the
storage is allocated from NVMM. The index and transient
pool in DRAM consume 12% of the total storage on average,
with a maximum of 15.5%. This allows NVCaracal to sup-
port larger datasets compared to a DRAM-only design. The
transient pool size does not expand with dataset size since
it is bounded by the epoch. For YCSB, the cached versions
consume a large amount of DRAM since the value sizes are
large, but the cached versions are not required for database
operations and so the dataset size is not limited by the cache
footprint. Cached versions can be evicted more aggressively
by setting a smaller value of K if memory pressure becomes
an issue. In all benchmarks except YCSB, most persistent
values can be inlined, thereby reducing NVMM usage for
persistent values.
6.6 Impact of Optimizations
Figure 9 shows the impact of the minor GC and cached ver-
sions optimizations on throughput. When it can be applied,
minor GC is the most beneficial optimization. Minor GC is
not triggered for YCSB since the values are too large to be
inlined. For the other benchmarks, the improvement due to
minor GC ranges from 9.8% in contended SmallBank to 32.4%
in uncontended YCSB-smallrow. The cached version opti-
mization improves performance by reducing NVMM reads.
Improvements range from 0.5% for TPC-C to 6% for YCSB.
However, creating cached versions has memory and CPU
overhead, and they are not always effective. In the worst
case there is a -5.2% drop in throughput for YCSB-smallrow.
We plan to explore creating cached versions only for hot
rows, which can be identified during epoch initialization.
6.7 Impact of Supporting Failure Recovery
We compare the throughput of NVCaracal with NVCaracal
without logging (no-logging) and NVCaracal in DRAM (all-
DRAM) in Figure 10. The latter two designs cannot support
failure recovery. We use NVCaracal for all-DRAM instead
of Caracal since it performs slightly better due to our minor
garbage collector optimization. For TPC-C, we see that input
logging only adds a 2% overhead in NVCaracal compared to
no-logging, since transaction inputs are much smaller than
transaction outputs. For SmallBank and YCSB the transaction
inputs are not much smaller, so logging adds a larger over-
head ranging from 4% to 17%. The amount of logging is not
affected by contention level, but its overhead increases since
the number of NVMM writes during execution is reduced
with contention.
348Figure 11. Recovery Time
Comparing NVCaracal to all-DRAM, NVCaracal is less
than 2x slower in most benchmarks, which is small com-
pared to the read and write throughput difference between
DRAM and NVMM. NVCaracal is the most efficient for the
contended SmallBank benchmark and is only 1.26x slower
than all-DRAM thanks to transient versions and inlining.
6.8 Recovery Performance
To measure the recovery performance of NVCaracal, we
run 4 million transactions and crash the database before the
epoch is checkpointed. Figure 11 breaks down the recovery
time into loading transactions, scanning persistent rows and
rebuilding the index, reverting changes for TPC-C, and re-
playing the epoch. In most workloads, it takes 2 seconds or
less to recover the database. The largest cost is scanning the
persistent rows and rebuilding the index, which depends on
the total size of persistent rows. Persistent values are not
scanned during recovery, so their size does not affect recov-
ery time. Replaying transactions is generally the next largest
contributor to recovery time, but it is bounded by the epoch
size and not the database size. Reverting changes for TPC-C
adds ≈1 second to recovery time under low contention, but
has almost no overhead under high contention because fewer
persistent values are written under contention and therefore
less reversions are needed. Note that Zen’s recovery design
does not require replaying transactions, but it requires scan-
ning the database rows more than once. As the database size
grows, Zen’s recovery performance will scale worse than
our design since we only scan the rows once and the epoch
replay time does not increase with database size.
6.9 Effects of Epoch Size
We evaluate NVCaracal with different epoch sizes ranging
from 5,000 to 100,000 transactions per epoch. Figure12 shows
the throughput and epoch latency trade-off for the different
epoch sizes. Overall, a larger epoch size results in a higher
throughput at the cost of higher latency. The differences
in throughput between the smallest and the largest epoch
sizes range from 3% (contended YCSB) to 51% (contended
SmallBank). Larger epochs result in higher throughputs for
two reasons. First, epoch synchronization is performed less
frequently and causes less overheads. Second, the number
Figure 12. Effects of Epoch Size on Throughput and Latency
of updates for each row in an epoch increases, so the per-
centage of transient updates increases as well, and thus a
higher percentage of updates can be written to DRAM in-
stead of NVMM. However, one exception is the contended
YCSB (smallrow) workload. For this workload, the largest
epoch size results in a 4% lower throughput than the smallest
epoch size. We observed that this is due to a slower append
phase. YCSB has a small set of hot rows that are updated
frequently in the contended workload. The version arrays of
these hot rows are much longer for larger epochs, and the
append phase slows down due to these long sorted version
arrays. This issue can be addressed using the batch append
optimization [20] that is currently not supported by our im-
plementation.
7 Conclusions
Non-volatile main memory presents an opportunity to
expand the dataset sizes of in-memory databases beyond
DRAM capacity. However the higher latency and lower
throughput of NVMM requires a careful redesign of the
database structures and memory allocation strategies. In this
work, we have integrated NVMM with a multi-versioned de-
terministic database. We take advantage of the epoch-based
deterministic execution model to store transient versions
in DRAM and checkpoint the final version to NVMM at
the end of each epoch. Our approach stores at most two
versions in NVMM, reduces NVMM accesses, provides
better access locality and reduces garbage collection costs.
Our approach also enables efficient schemes for persistent
allocation, caching data in DRAM and failure recovery.
Our results show that our approach lowers the cost of
using NVMM, allowing us to scale the dataset size, support
efficient failure recovery, and achieve good performance
even with contended workloads.
Currently, we store the row indexes in DRAM. We plan
to explore persisting the row indexes to NVMM to improve
349recovery time and reduce DRAM requirements further. We
expect that our epoch-based design will allow persisting
index updates in batches efficiently. Our results show that
caching values in DRAM is not always beneficial for cold
rows. We plan to explore strategies to selectively cache val-
ues using the write-set information that is available during
epoch initialization.
Our design targets determinisitic databases that know or
can speculatively infer the write set of transactions before
their execution. Recently proposed deterministic concur-
rency control schemes such as Aria [
16] and BCDB [ 18]
eliminate this requirement by executing a batch of trans-
actions against a snapshot of the database and by using
deterministic cycle prevention to ensure serializability. We
plan to explore integrating NVMM in these databases.
We also plan to extend our design to non-deterministic
databases that support epoch-based commit and replica-
tion [
17]. Unlike deterministic databases, these databases
cannot make results visible to users until the epoch commits
and must revert all changes made in a crashed epoch during
recovery due to the lack of deterministic replay. We expect
that these differences will only have a small impact on our
design.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd,
Shimin Chen, for their valuable feedback. We specially
thank Michael Stumm, Ding Yuan, and the members of the
Caracal group, especially Dai Qin and Zhiqi He, for their
insightful suggestions. This research was supported by an
NSERC Discovery Grant.
References
[1] Mohammad Alomari, Michael Cahill, Alan Fekete, and Uwe Rohm.
2008. The Cost of Serializability on Platforms That Use Snapshot Iso-
lation. In 2008 IEEE 24th International Conference on Data Engineering.
576–585. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2008.4497466
[2] Joy Arulraj, Matthew Perron, and Andrew Pavlo. 2016. Write-behind
Logging. Proc. VLDB Endow. 10, 4 (Nov. 2016), 337–348. https://doi.
org/10.14778/3025111.3025116
[3] Brian F. Cooper, Adam Silberstein, Erwin Tam, Raghu Ramakrishnan,
and Russell Sears. 2010. Benchmarking Cloud Serving Systems with
YCSB. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing
(Indianapolis, Indiana, USA) (SoCC ’10). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 143–154. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1807128.1807152
[4] James Cowling and Barbara Liskov. 2012. Granola: Low-Overhead Dis-
tributed Transaction Coordination. In Proceedings of the 2012 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (Boston, MA) (USENIX ATC’12). USENIX
Association, USA, 21–33.
[5] Jose M. Faleiro and Daniel J. Abadi. 2015. Rethinking Serializable
Multiversion Concurrency Control. Proc. VLDB Endow. 8, 11 (July
2015), 1190–1201. https://doi.org/10.14778/2809974.2809981
[6] Jose M. Faleiro, Daniel J. Abadi, and Joseph M. Hellerstein. 2017. High
Performance Transactions via Early Write Visibility.Proc. VLDB Endow.
10, 5 (Jan. 2017), 613–624. https://doi.org/10.14778/3055540.3055553
[7] Michael Haubenschild, Caetano Sauer, Thomas Neumann, and Viktor
Leis. 2020. Rethinking Logging, Checkpoints, and Recovery for High-
Performance Storage Engines. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data (Portland, OR, USA)
(SIGMOD ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 877–892. https://doi.org/10.1145/3318464.3389716
[8] Yihe Huang, William Qian, Eddie Kohler, Barbara Liskov, and Liuba
Shrira. 2020. Opportunities for Optimism in Contended Main-Memory
Multicore Transactions. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 5 (Jan. 2020), 629–642.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3377369.3377373
[9] Deukyeon Hwang, Wook-Hee Kim, Youjip Won, and Beomseok Nam.
2018. Endurable Transient Inconsistency in Byte-Addressable Persis-
tent B+-Tree. In 16th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technolo-
gies (FAST 18). USENIX Association, Oakland, CA, 187–200. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/fast18/presentation/hwang
[10] Robert Kallman, Hideaki Kimura, Jonathan Natkins, Andrew Pavlo,
Alexander Rasin, Stanley Zdonik, Evan P. C. Jones, Samuel Mad-
den, Michael Stonebraker, Yang Zhang, John Hugg, and Daniel J.
Abadi. 2008. H-Store: A High-Performance, Distributed Main Memory
Transaction Processing System. Proc. VLDB Endow. 1, 2 (Aug. 2008),
1496–1499. https://doi.org/10.14778/1454159.1454211
[11] Se Kwon Lee, Jayashree Mohan, Sanidhya Kashyap, Taesoo Kim, and
Vijay Chidambaram. 2019. Recipe: Converting Concurrent DRAM
Indexes to Persistent-Memory Indexes. In Proceedings of the 27th
ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (Huntsville, Ontario,
Canada) (SOSP ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 462–477. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341301.3359635
[12] Viktor Leis, Michael Haubenschild, Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neu-
mann. 2018. LeanStore: In-Memory Data Management beyond Main
Memory. In 2018 IEEE 34th International Conference on Data Engineer-
ing (ICDE). 185–196. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2018.00026
[13] Yu-Shan Lin, Shao-Kan Pi, Meng-Kai Liao, Ching Tsai, Aaron Elmore,
and Shan-Hung Wu. 2019. MgCrab: Transaction Crabbing for Live
Migration in Deterministic Database Systems. Proc. VLDB Endow. 12,
5 (Jan. 2019), 597–610. https://doi.org/10.14778/3303753.3303764
[14] Gang Liu, Leying Chen, and Shimin Chen. 2021. Zen: A High-
Throughput Log-Free OLTP Engine for Non-Volatile Main Memory.
Proc. VLDB Endow. 14, 5 (Jan. 2021), 835–848. https://doi.org/10.14778/
3446095.3446105
[15] Baotong Lu, Xiangpeng Hao, Tianzheng Wang, and Eric Lo. 2020.
Dash: Scalable Hashing on Persistent Memory. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13,
8 (April 2020), 1147–1161. https://doi.org/10.14778/3389133.3389134
[16] Yi Lu, Xiangyao Yu, Lei Cao, and Samuel Madden. 2020. Aria: A Fast
and Practical Deterministic OLTP Database. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 12
(July 2020), 2047–2060. https://doi.org/10.14778/3407790.3407808
[17] Yi Lu, Xiangyao Yu, Lei Cao, and Samuel Madden. 2021. Epoch-Based
Commit and Replication in Distributed OLTP Databases. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 14, 5 (Jan. 2021), 743–756. https://doi.org/10.14778/3446095.
3446098
[18] Senthil Nathan, Chander Govindarajan, Adarsh Saraf, Manish Sethi,
and Praveen Jayachandran. 2019. Blockchain Meets Database: Design
and Implementation of a Blockchain Relational Database. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 12, 11 (July 2019), 1539–1552. https://doi.org/10.14778/3342263.
3342632
[19] Ismail Oukid, Johan Lasperas, Anisoara Nica, Thomas Willhalm, and
Wolfgang Lehner. 2016. FPTree: A Hybrid SCM-DRAM Persistent and
Concurrent B-Tree for Storage Class Memory. In Proceedings of the
2016 International Conference on Management of Data (San Francisco,
California, USA) (SIGMOD ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 371–386. https://doi.org/10.1145/2882903.2915251
[20] Dai Qin, Angela Demke Brown, and Ashvin Goel. 2021. Caracal:
Contention Management with Deterministic Concurrency Control.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles (Virtual Event, Germany) (SOSP ’21). Association
350for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 180–194. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3477132.3483591
[21] Kun Ren, Dennis Li, and Daniel J. Abadi. 2019. SLOG: Serializable,
Low-Latency, Geo-Replicated Transactions. Proc. VLDB Endow. 12, 11
(July 2019), 1747–1761. https://doi.org/10.14778/3342263.3342647
[22] Alexander Thomson and Daniel J. Abadi. 2010. The Case for Deter-
minism in Database Systems. Proc. VLDB Endow. 3, 1–2 (Sept. 2010),
70–80. https://doi.org/10.14778/1920841.1920855
[23] Alexander Thomson, Thaddeus Diamond, Shu-Chun Weng, Kun Ren,
Philip Shao, and Daniel J. Abadi. 2012. Calvin: Fast Distributed Transac-
tions for Partitioned Database Systems. InProceedings of the 2012 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (Scottsdale,
Arizona, USA) (SIGMOD ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/2213836.2213838
[24] Transaction Processing Performance Council (TPC). 2010. TPC Bench-
mark C Standard Specification, Revision 5.11.
[25] Stephen Tu, Wenting Zheng, Eddie Kohler, Barbara Liskov, and
Samuel Madden. 2013. Speedy Transactions in Multicore In-Memory
Databases. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth ACM Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles (Farminton, Pennsylvania) (SOSP ’13).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 18–32.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2517349.2522713
[26] Alexander van Renen, Viktor Leis, Alfons Kemper, Thomas Neu-
mann, Takushi Hashida, Kazuichi Oe, Yoshiyasu Doi, Lilian Harada,
and Mitsuru Sato. 2018. Managing Non-Volatile Memory in Data-
base Systems. InProceedings of the 2018 International Conference
on Management of Data (Houston, TX, USA) (SIGMOD ’18). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1541–1555.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3183713.3196897
[27] Xinjing Zhou, Joy Arulraj, Andrew Pavlo, and David Cohen. 2021.
Spitfire: A Three-Tier Buffer Manager for Volatile and Non-Volatile
Memory. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Man-
agement of Data (Virtual Event, China) (SIGMOD/PODS ’21). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2195–2207.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3452819
[28] Xinjing Zhou, Lidan Shou, Ke Chen, Wei Hu, and Gang Chen. 2019.
DPTree: Differential Indexing for Persistent Memory.Proc. VLDB
Endow. 13, 4 (Dec. 2019), 421–434. https://doi.org/10.14778/3372716.
3372717
A Artifact Appendix
A.1 Abstract
This appendix provides information for our artifact, the im-
plementation of NVCaracal.
A.2 Description & Requirements
The implementation of NVCaracal is publicly available on
GitHub at https://github.com/uoft-felis/felis/tree/pmem.
To compile and run this artifact, your machine should be
equipped with a CPU with at least 8 cores, at least 128GB
of Intel Optane Persistent Memory, and at least 64GB of
DRAM.
A.2.1 Hardware dependencies.
Intel Optane Persistent Memory (at least 128GB)
A.2.2 Software dependencies.
Linux operating system
A.2.3 Benchmarks.
The artifact includes implementations for all three bench-
marks evaluated in the paper (TPC-C, YCSB, and SmallBank).
A.3 Set-up
Please refer to the instructions provided in the artifact
athttps://github.com/uoft-felis/felis/blob/pmem/doc/
artifact_instructions.md.
A.4 Evaluation workflow 2
A.4.1 Major Claims.
•(C1): NVCaracal achieves higher throughput as the
contention level in the workload increases, due to less
NVMM writes for persistent values. This is proven by
the experiment (E1) described in Section 6.4 whose
results are illustrated in Figure 7.
A.4.2 Experiments.
Experiment (E1): [NVCaracal Throughput Measurements]
[30 human-minutes + 30 compute-minutes]: measures
NVCaracal’s throughput with the TPC-C, YCSB, and
SmallBank benchmarks under low and high contention.
[How to] Follow the instructions provided in the arti-
fact at https://github.com/uoft-felis/felis/blob/pmem/doc/
artifact_instructions.md to run the TPC-C, YCSB, and
SmallBank benchmarks with low and high contention. The
throughput will be displayed at the end of each run.
[Results] Results should follow a similar trend as fig-
ure 7, where NVCaracal’s throughput increases with higher
contention level in the workload.
2Submission, reviewing and badging methodology followed for the eval-
uation of this artifact can be found at https://sysartifacts.github.io/
eurosys2023/.
351